---
title: "Real-Time Streaming with Apache Spark Streaming"
description: "Overview of Apache Spark and a sample Twitter Sentiment Analysis"
tags:
  - "Apache Spark"
  - "Apache Kafka"
  - "Apache"
  - "Java"
  - "Sentiment Analysis"
  - "Real-time Streaming"
  - "ZData Inc."
date: "2014-08-18"
catagories:
  - "Apache"
  - "Development"
  - "Real-time Systems"
slug: "real-time-streaming-apache-spark-streaming"
---

This is the second post in a series on real-time systems tangential to the
Hadoop ecosystem. [Last time][6], we talked about [Apache Kafka][5] and Apache
Storm for use in a real-time processing engine. Today, we will be exploring
Apache Spark (Streaming) as part of a real-time processing engine.

## About Spark ##

[Apache Spark][1] is a general purpose, large-scale processing engine, recently
fully inducted as an Apache project and is currently under very active
development. As of this writing, Spark is at version 1.0.2 and 1.1 will be
released some time soon.

Spark is intended to be a drop in replacement for Hadoop MapReduce providing
the benefit of improved performance. Combining Spark with its related projects
and libraries -- [Spark SQL (formerly Shark)][14], [Spark Streaming][15],
[Spark MLlib][16], [GraphX][17], among others -- and a very capable and
promising processing stack emerges. Spark is capable of reading from HBase,
Hive, Cassandra, and any HDFS data source. Not to mention the many external
libraries that enable consuming data from many more sources, e.g., hooking
Apache Kafka into Spark Streaming is trivial. Further, the Spark Streaming
project provides the ability to continuously compute transformations on data.

### Resilient Distributed Datasets ###

Apache Spark's primitive type is the Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD). All
transformations, `map`, `join`, `reduce`, etc., in Spark revolve around this
type. RDD's can be created in one of three ways: _parallelizing_ (distributing
a local dataset); reading a stable, external data source, such as an HDFS file;
or transformations on existing RDD's.

In Java, parallelizing may look like:

    List<Integer> data = Arrays.asList(1, 2, 3, 4, 5);
    JavaRDD<Integer> distData = sc.parallelize(data);

Where `sc` defines the Spark context.

Similarly, reading a file from HDFS may look like:

    JavaRDD<String> distFile = sc.textFile("hdfs:///data.txt");

The resiliency of RDD's comes from their [lazy][34] materialization and the
information required to enable this lazy nature. RDD's are not always fully
materialized but they _do_ contain enough information (their linage) to be
(re)created from a stable source [[Zaharia et al.][32]].

RDD's are distributed among the participating machines, and RDD transformations
are coarse-grained -- the same transformation will be applied to _every_
element in an RDD. The number of partitions in an RDD is generally defined by
the locality of the stable source, however, the user may control this number
via repartitioning.

Another important property to mention, RDD's are actually immutable. This
immutability can be illustrated with [Spark's][27] Word Count example:

    JavaRDD<String> file = sc.textFile("hdfs:///data.txt");
    JavaRDD<String> words = file.flatMap(
        new FlatMapFunction<String, String>() {
            public Iterable<String> call(String line) {
                return Arrays.asList(line.split(" "));
            }
        }
    );
    JavaPairRDD<String, Integer> pairs = words.map(
        new PairFunction<String, String, Integer>() {
            public Tuple2<String, Integer> call(String word) {
                return new Tuple2<String, Integer>(word, 1);
            }
        }
    );
    JavaPairRDD<String, Integer> counts = pairs.reduceByKey(
        new Function2<Integer, Integer>() {
            public Integer call(Integer a, Integer b) { return a + b; }
        }
    );
    counts.saveAsTextFile("hdfs:///data_counted.txt");

This is the canonical word count example, but here is a brief explanation: load
a file into an RDD, split the words into a new RDD, map the words into pairs
where each word is given a count (one), then reduce the counts of each word by
a key, in this case the word itself. Notice, each operation, `map`, `flatMap`,
`reduceByKey`, creates a _new_ RDD.

To bring all these properties together, Resilient Distributed Datasets are
read-only, lazy distributed sets of elements that can have a chain of
transformations applied to them. They facilitate resiliency by storing lineage
graphs of the transformations (to be) applied and they [parallelize][35] the
computations by partitioning the data among the participating machines.

### Discretized Streams ###

Moving to Spark Streaming, the primitive is still RDD's. However, there is
another type for encapsulating a continuous stream of data: Discretized Streams
or DStreams. DStreams are defined as sequences of RDD's. A DStream is created
from an input source, such as Apache Kafka, or from the transformation of
another DStream.

Turns out, programming against DStreams is _very_ similar to programming
against RDD's. The same word count code can be slightly modified to create a
streaming word counter:

    JavaReceiverInputDStream<String> lines = ssc.socketTextStream("localhost", 9999);
    JavaDStream<String> words = lines.flatMap(
        new FlatMapFunction<String, String>() {
            public Iterable<String> call(String line) {
                return Arrays.asList(line.split(" "));
            }
        }
    );
    JavaPairDStream<String, Integer> pairs = words.map(
        new PairFunction<String, String, Integer>() {
            public Tuple2<String, Integer> call(String word) {
                return new Tuple2<String, Integer>(word, 1);
            }
        }
    );
    JavaPairDStream<String, Integer> counts = pairs.reduceByKey(
        new Function2<Integer, Integer>() {
            public Integer call(Integer a, Integer b) { return a + b; }
        }
    );
    counts.print();

Notice, really the only change between first example's code is the return
types. In the streaming context, transformations are working on streams of
RDD's, Spark handles applying the functions (that work against data in the
RDD's) to the RDD's in the current batch/ DStream.

Though programming against DStreams is similar, there are indeed some
differences as well. Chiefly, DStreams also have _statefull_ transformations.
These include sharing state between batches/ intervals and modifying the
current frame when aggregating over a sliding window.

>The key idea is to treat streaming as a series of short batch jobs, and bring
>down the latency of these jobs as much as possible. This brings many of the
>benefits of batch processing models to stream processing, including clear
>consistency semantics and a new parallel recovery technique...
[[Zaharia et al.][33]]

### Hadoop Requirements ###

Technically speaking, Apache Spark does [_not_][30] require Hadoop to be fully
functional. In a cluster setting, however, a means of sharing files between
tasks will need to be facilitated. This could be accomplished through [S3][8],
[NFS][9], or, more typically, HDFS.

### Running Spark Applications ###

Apache Spark applications can run in [standalone mode][18] or be managed by
[YARN][10]([Running Spark on YARN][19]), [Mesos][11]([Running Spark on
Mesos][20]), and even [EC2][28]([Running Spark on EC2][29]). Furthermore, if
running under YARN or Mesos, Spark does not need to be installed to work. That
is, Spark code can execute on YARN and Mesos clusters without change to the
cluster.

### Language Support ###

Currently, Apache Spark supports the Scala, Java, and Python programming
languages. Though, this post will only be discussing examples in Java.

### Initial Thoughts ###

Getting away from the idea of directed acyclic graphs (DAG's) is -- may be --
both a bit of a leap and a benefit. Although it is perfectly acceptable to
define Spark's transformations altogether as a DAG, this can feel awkward when
developing Spark applications. Describing the transformations as [Monadic][13]
feels much more natural. Of course, a monad structure fits the DAG analogy
quite well, especially when considered in some of the physical analogies such
as assembly lines.

Java's, and consequently Spark's, type strictness was an initial hurdle to
get accustomed. But overall, this is good. It means the compiler will catch a
lot of issues with transformations early.

Depending on Scala's `Tuple[\d]` classes feels second-class, but this is only a
minor tedium. It's too bad current versions of Java don't have good classes for
this common structure.

YARN and Mesos integration is a very nice benefit as it allows full stack
analytics to not oversubscribe clusters. Furthermore, it gives the ability to
add to existing infrastructure without overloading the developers and the
system administrators with _yet another_ computational suite and/ or resource
manager.

On the negative side of things, dependency hell can creep into Spark projects.
Your project and Spark (and possibly Spark's dependencies) may depend on a
common artifact. If the versions don't [converge][21], many subtle problems can
emerge. There is an [experimental configuration option][4] to help alleviate
this problem, however, for me, it caused more problems than solved.

## Test Project: Twitter Stream Sentiment Analysis ##

To really test Spark (Streaming), a Twitter Sentiment Analysis project was
developed. It's almost a direct port of the [Storm code][3]. Though there is an
external library for hooking Spark directly into Twitter, Kafka is used so a
more precise comparison of Spark and Storm can be made.

When the processing is finished, the data are written to HDFS and posted to a
simple NodeJS application.

### Setup ###

The setup is the same as [last time][6]: 5 node Vagrant virtual cluster with
each node running 64 bit CentOS 6.5, given 1 core, and 1024MB of RAM. Every
node is running HDFS (datanode), YARN worker nodes (nodemanager), ZooKeeper,
and Kafka. The first node, `node0`, is the namenode and resource manager.
`node0` is also running a [Docker][7] container with a NodeJS application for
reporting purposes.

### Application Overview ###

This project follows a very similar process structure as the Storm Topology
from last time.

{{< figure src="/media/SentimentAnalysisTopology.png"
    alt="Sentiment Analysis Topology" >}}

However, each node in the above graph is actually a transformation on the
current DStream and not an individual process (or group of processes).

This test project similarly uses the same [simple Kafka producer][22]
developed. This Kafka producer will be how data are ingested by the system.

[A lot of this overview will be a rehashing of last time.]

#### Kafka Receiver Stream ####

The data processed is received from a Kafka Stream and is implemented via the
[external Kafka][23] library. This process simply creates a connection to the
Kafka broker(s), consuming messages from the given set of topics.

##### Stripping Kafka Message IDs #####

It turns out the messages from Kafka are retuned as tuples, more specifically
pairs, with the message ID and the message content. Before continuing, the
message ID is stripped and the Twitter JSON data is passed down the pipeline.

#### Twitter Data JSON Parsing ####

As was the case last time, the important parts (tweet ID, tweet text, and
language code) need to be extracted from the JSON. Furthermore, this project
only parses English tweets. Non-English tweets are filtered out at this stage.

#### Filtering and Stemming ####

Many tweets contain messy or otherwise unnecessary characters and punctuation
that can be safely ignored. Moreover, there may also be many common words that
cannot be reliably scored either positively or negatively. At this stage, these
symbols and _stop words_ should be filtered.

#### Classifiers ####

Both the Positive classifier and the Negative classifier are in separate `map`
transformations. The implementation of both follows the [Bag-of-words][25]
model.

#### Joining and Scoring ####

Because the classifiers are done separately and a join is contrived, the next
step is to join the classifier scores together and actually declare a winner.
It turns out this is quite trivial to do in Spark.

#### Reporting: HDFS and HTTP POST ####

Finally, once the tweets are joined and scored, the scores need to be reported.
This is accomplished by writing the final tuples to HDFS and posting a JSON
object of the tuple to a simple NodeJS application.

This process turned out to not be as awkward as was the case with Storm. The
`foreachRDD` function of DStreams is a natural way to do side-effect inducing
operations that don't necessarily transform the data.

### Implementing the Kafka Producer ###

See the [post][6] from last time for the details of the Kafka producer; this
has not changed.

### Implementing the Spark Streaming Application ###

Diving into the code, here are some of the primary aspects of this project. The
full source of this test application can be found on [Github][24].

#### Creating Spark Context, Wiring Transformation Chain ####

The Spark context, the data source, and the transformations need to be defined.
Proceeding, the context needs to be started. This is all accomplished with the
following code:

    SparkConf conf = new SparkConf()
                     .setAppName("Twitter Sentiment Analysis");

    if (args.length > 0)
        conf.setMaster(args[0]);
    else
        conf.setMaster("local[2]");

    JavaStreamingContext ssc = new JavaStreamingContext(
        conf,
        new Duration(2000));

    Map<String, Integer> topicMap = new HashMap<String, Integer>();
    topicMap.put(KAFKA_TOPIC, KAFKA_PARALLELIZATION);

    JavaPairReceiverInputDStream<String, String> messages =
        KafkaUtils.createStream(
            ssc,
            Properties.getString("rts.spark.zkhosts"),
            "twitter.sentimentanalysis.kafka",
            topicMap);

    JavaDStream<String> json = messages.map(
        new Function<Tuple2<String, String>, String>() {
            public String call(Tuple2<String, String> message) {
                return message._2();
            }
        }
    );

    JavaPairDStream<Long, String> tweets = json.mapToPair(
        new TwitterFilterFunction());

    JavaPairDStream<Long, String> filtered = tweets.filter(
        new Function<Tuple2<Long, String>, Boolean>() {
            public Boolean call(Tuple2<Long, String> tweet) {
                return tweet != null;
            }
        }
    );

    JavaDStream<Tuple2<Long, String>> tweetsFiltered = filtered.map(
        new TextFilterFunction());

    tweetsFiltered = tweetsFiltered.map(
        new StemmingFunction());

    JavaPairDStream<Tuple2<Long, String>, Float> positiveTweets =
        tweetsFiltered.mapToPair(new PositiveScoreFunction());

    JavaPairDStream<Tuple2<Long, String>, Float> negativeTweets =
        tweetsFiltered.mapToPair(new NegativeScoreFunction());

    JavaPairDStream<Tuple2<Long, String>, Tuple2<Float, Float>> joined =
        positiveTweets.join(negativeTweets);

    JavaDStream<Tuple4<Long, String, Float, Float>> scoredTweets =
        joined.map(new Function<Tuple2<Tuple2<Long, String>,
                                       Tuple2<Float, Float>>,
                                Tuple4<Long, String, Float, Float>>() {
        public Tuple4<Long, String, Float, Float> call(
            Tuple2<Tuple2<Long, String>, Tuple2<Float, Float>> tweet)
        {
            return new Tuple4<Long, String, Float, Float>(
                tweet._1()._1(),
                tweet._1()._2(),
                tweet._2()._1(),
                tweet._2()._2());
        }
    });

    JavaDStream<Tuple5<Long, String, Float, Float, String>> result =
        scoredTweets.map(new ScoreTweetsFunction());

    result.foreachRDD(new FileWriter());
    result.foreachRDD(new HTTPNotifierFunction());

    ssc.start();
    ssc.awaitTermination();

Some of the more trivial transforms are defined in-line. The others are defined
in their respective files.

#### Twitter Data Filter / Parser ####

Parsing Twitter JSON data is one of the first transformations and is
accomplished with help of the [JacksonXML Databind][26] library.

    JsonNode root = mapper.readValue(tweet, JsonNode.class);
    long id;
    String text;
    if (root.get("lang") != null &&
        "en".equals(root.get("lang").textValue()))
    {
        if (root.get("id") != null && root.get("text") != null)
        {
            id = root.get("id").longValue();
            text = root.get("text").textValue();
            return new Tuple2<Long, String>(id, text);
        }
        return null;
    }
    return null;

The `mapper` (`ObjectMapper`) object is defined at the class level so it is not
recreated _for each_ RDD in the DStream, a minor optimization.

You may recall, this is essentially the same code as [last time][6]. The only
difference really is that the tuple is returned instead of being emitted.
Because certain situations (e.g., non-English tweet, malformed tweet) return
null, the nulls will need to be filtered out. Thankfully, Spark provides a
simple way to accomplish this:

    JavaPairDStream<Long, String> filtered = tweets.filter(
        new Function<Tuple2<Long, String>, Boolean>() {
            public Boolean call(Tuple2<Long, String> tweet) {
                return tweet != null;
            }
        }
    );

#### Text Filtering ####

As mentioned before, punctuation and other symbols are simply discarded as they
provide little to no benefit to the classifiers:

    String text = tweet._2();
    text = text.replaceAll("[^a-zA-Z\\s]", "").trim().toLowerCase();
    return new Tuple2<Long, String>(tweet._1(), text);

Similarly, common words should be discarded as well:

    String text = tweet._2();
    List<String> stopWords = StopWords.getWords();
    for (String word : stopWords)
    {
        text = text.replaceAll("\\b" + word + "\\b", "");
    }
    return new Tuple2<Long, String>(tweet._1(), text);

#### Positive and Negative Scoring ####

Each classifier is defined in its own class. Both classifiers are _very_
similar in definition.

The positive classifier is primarily defined by:

    String text = tweet._2();
    Set<String> posWords = PositiveWords.getWords();
    String[] words = text.split(" ");
    int numWords = words.length;
    int numPosWords = 0;
    for (String word : words)
    {
        if (posWords.contains(word))
            numPosWords++;
    }
    return new Tuple2<Tuple2<Long, String>, Float>(
        new Tuple2<Long, String>(tweet._1(), tweet._2()),
        (float) numPosWords / numWords
    );

And the negative classifier:

    String text = tweet._2();
    Set<String> negWords = NegativeWords.getWords();
    String[] words = text.split(" ");
    int numWords = words.length;
    int numPosWords = 0;
    for (String word : words)
    {
        if (negWords.contains(word))
            numPosWords++;
    }
    return new Tuple2<Tuple2<Long, String>, Float>(
        new Tuple2<Long, String>(tweet._1(), tweet._2()),
        (float) numPosWords / numWords
    );

Because both are implementing a `PairFunction`, a join situation is contrived.
However, this could _easily_ be defined differently such that one classifier is
computed, then the next, without ever needing to join the two together.

#### Joining ####

It turns out, joining in Spark is very easy to accomplish. So easy in fact, it
can be handled without virtually _any_ code:

    JavaPairDStream<Tuple2<Long, String>, Tuple2<Float, Float>> joined =
        positiveTweets.join(negativeTweets);

But because working with a Tuple of nested tuples seems unwieldy, transform it
to a 4 element tuple:

    public Tuple4<Long, String, Float, Float> call(
        Tuple2<Tuple2<Long, String>, Tuple2<Float, Float>> tweet)
    {
        return new Tuple4<Long, String, Float, Float>(
            tweet._1()._1(),
            tweet._1()._2(),
            tweet._2()._1(),
            tweet._2()._2());
    }

#### Scoring: Declaring Winning Class ####

Declaring the winning class is a matter of a simple map, comparing each class's
score and take the greatest:

    String score;
    if (tweet._3() >= tweet._4())
        score = "positive";
    else
        score = "negative";
    return new Tuple5<Long, String, Float, Float, String>(
        tweet._1(),
        tweet._2(),
        tweet._3(),
        tweet._4(),
        score);

This declarer is more optimistic about the neutral case but is otherwise very
straightforward.

#### Reporting the Results ####

Finally, the pipeline completes with writing the results to HDFS:

    if (rdd.count() <= 0) return null;
    String path = Properties.getString("rts.spark.hdfs_output_file") +
                  "_" +
                  time.milliseconds();
    rdd.saveAsTextFile(path);

And sending POST request to a NodeJS application:

    rdd.foreach(new SendPostFunction());

Where `SendPostFunction` is primarily given by:

    String webserver = Properties.getString("rts.spark.webserv");
    HttpClient client = new DefaultHttpClient();
    HttpPost post = new HttpPost(webserver);
    String content = String.format(
        "{\"id\": \"%d\", "     +
        "\"text\": \"%s\", "    +
        "\"pos\": \"%f\", "     +
        "\"neg\": \"%f\", "     +
        "\"score\": \"%s\" }",
        tweet._1(),
        tweet._2(),
        tweet._3(),
        tweet._4(),
        tweet._5());

    try
    {
        post.setEntity(new StringEntity(content));
        HttpResponse response = client.execute(post);
        org.apache.http.util.EntityUtils.consume(response.getEntity());
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        Logger LOG = Logger.getLogger(this.getClass());
        LOG.error("exception thrown while attempting to post", ex);
        LOG.trace(null, ex);
    }

Each file written to HDFS _will_ have data in it, but the data written will be
small. A better batching procedure should be implemented so the files written
match the HDFS block size.

Similarly, a POST request is opened _for each_ scored tweet. This can be
expensive on both the Spark Streaming batch timings and the web server
receiving the requests. Batching here could similarly improve overall
performance of the system.

That said, writing these side-effects this way fits very naturally into the
Spark programming style.

## Summary ##

Apache Spark, in combination with Apache Kafka, has some amazing potential. And
not only in the Streaming context, but as a drop-in replacement for
traditional Hadoop MapReduce. This combination makes it a very good candidate
for a part in an analytics engine.

Stay tuned, as the next post will be a more in-depth comparison between Apache
Spark and Apache Storm.

## Related Links / References ##

[1]: http://spark.apache.org/

*   [Apache Spark][1]

[2]: http://inside-bigdata.com/2014/07/15/theres-spark-theres-fire-state-apache-spark-2014/

*   [State of Apache Spark 2014][2]

[3]: https://github.com/zdata-inc/StormSampleProject

*   [Storm Sample Project][3]

[4]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SPARK-939

*   [SPARK-939][4]

[5]: http://kafka.apache.org

*   [Apache Spark][5]

[6]: https://kennyballou.com/blog/2014/07/real-time-streaming-storm-and-kafka

*   [Real-Time Streaming with Apache Storm and Apache Kafka][6]

[7]: http://www.docker.io/

*   [Docker IO Project Page][7]

[8]: http://aws.amazon.com/s3/

*   [Amazon S3][8]

[9]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_File_System

*   [Network File System (NFS)][9]

[10]: http://hadoop.apache.org/docs/current/hadoop-yarn/hadoop-yarn-site/YARN.html

*   [Hadoop YARN][10]

[11]: http://mesos.apache.org

*   [Apache Mesos][11]

[12]: http://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/streaming-programming-guide.html

*   [Spark Streaming Programming Guide][12]

[13]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad_(functional_programming)

*   [Monad][13]

[14]: http://spark.apache.org/sql/

*   [Spark SQL][14]

[15]: http://spark.apache.org/streaming/

*   [Spark Streaming][15]

[16]: http://spark.apache.org/mllib/

*   [MLlib][16]

[17]: http://spark.apache.org/graphx/

*   [GraphX][17]

[18]: http://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/spark-standalone.html

*   [Spark Standalone Mode][18]

[19]: http://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/running-on-yarn.html

*   [Running on YARN][19]

[20]: http://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/running-on-mesos.html

*   [Running on Mesos][20]

[21]: http://cupofjava.de/blog/2013/02/01/fight-dependency-hell-in-maven/

*   [Fight Dependency Hell in Maven][21]

[22]: https://github.com/zdata-inc/SimpleKafkaProducer

*   [Simple Kafka Producer][22]

[23]: https://github.com/apache/spark/tree/master/external/kafka

*   [Spark: External Kafka Library][23]

[24]: https://github.com/zdata-inc/SparkSampleProject

*   [Spark Sample Project][24]

[25]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bag-of-words_model

*   [Wikipedia: Bag-of-words][25]

[26]: https://github.com/FasterXML/jackson-databind

*   [Jackson XML Databind Project][26]

[27]: http://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/programming-guide.html

*   [Spark Programming Guide][27]

[28]: http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/

*   [Amazon EC2][28]

[29]: http://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/ec2-scripts.html

*   [Running Spark on EC2][29]

[30]: http://spark.apache.org/faq.html

*   [Spark FAQ][30]

[31]: http://databricks.com/blog/2014/03/26/spark-sql-manipulating-structured-data-using-spark-2.html

*   [Future of Shark][31]

[32]: https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/nsdi12/nsdi12-final138.pdf

*   [Resilient Distributed Datasets: A Fault-Tolerant Abstraction for In-Memory Cluster Computing (PDF)][32]

[33]: https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/hotcloud12/hotcloud12-final28.pdf

*   [Discretized Streams: An Efficient and Fault-Tolerant Model for Stream Processing on Large Clusters (PDF)][33]

[34]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lazy_evaluation

*   [Wikipedia: Lazy evaluation][34]

[35]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_parallelism

*   [Wikipedia: Data Parallelism][35]
